Dashing through the snow
In a one horse open sleigh
Over the fields we go
Laughing all the way
Bells on bobtail ring
Making spirits bright
What fun it is to laugh and sing
A sleighing song tonight!
Oh, jingle bells, jingle bells
Jingle all the way
Oh! what fun it is to ride
In a one horse open sleigh, hey
Jingle bells, jingle bells
Jingle all the way
Oh! what fun it is to ride
In a one horse open sleigh
Now the ground is white
Go it while you're young
Take the girls tonight
And sing this sleighing song
Just get a bobtailed bay
Two forty as his speed
Hitch him to an open sleigh
And crack! You'll take the lead
Jingle bells, jigle bells
Jingle all the way
Oh, what fun it is to ride
In one horse open sleigh, hey
Jingle bells, jingle bells
Jingle all the way
Oh, what fun it is to ride
In one horse open sleigh
Oh, what fun it is to ride
In one horse open sleigh..
Drills as Language Teaching Material
Definition and Uses of Drills
A drill is “A type of highly controlled oral practice in which the students respond to
a given cue. The response varies according to the type of drill.” (Matthews, Spratt,
and Dangerfield 1991, 210). Drills are used usually at the controlled practice stage
of language learning so that students have the opportunity to accurately try out
what they have learned. Drills help students to develop quick, automatic responses
using a specific formulaic expression or structure, such as a tag ending, verb form,
or transformation.
Drills have been much maligned for their behavioristic, stimulus-response
nature and for the mechanical, repetitive practice they provide. In classrooms that
use the audiolingual method, which became popular in the 1950s, drills are basic
to language teaching.
Many of us know that drill-based lessons are not always particularly stimulating. In fact, you may remember language drills in which you could accurately
respond in the drill without knowing what you were saying. There’s a joke among
language teachers: “Dictionary definition: Drill—a device for boring” (Hubbard
1990, 19). However, drills do respond to the learning style of those who learn well
through memorization and repetition.
Drills can be useful teaching-learning material because they provide practice of
small, manageable chunks of language. This helps to build confidence and automatic use of structures and expressions that have been drilled. Also, they can be
part of a teaching or learning sequence that progresses from more towards less controlled practice.
Mary Spratt (1991) notes that drills can be either mechanical or meaningful.
Mechanical drills are controlled by the teacher who provides drill cues to which 
Drills, Dialogues, and Role Plays 3
students respond. These drills can give beginning students a chance to articulate the
new language fluently. Meaningful drills are controlled by the teacher as well as by
the students who must understand the drill cues in order to respond. Meaningful
drills are more desirable than mechanical drills because they provide a reason for
speaking and are thus more engaging and motivating. Spratt (10–11) points out
these requisites for meaningful drills:
• They should look like real language, containing hesitations, proper social
reactions such as exclamations, questions, or comments that require a
response. They can even consider register and nonverbal elements.
• The response should not be totally predictable; a variety of responses should
be incorporated.
• They should involve genuine reactions between or among the speakers.
• They should be purposeful and based on topics of relevance to students
• They should be sufficiently controlled and allow the teacher to observe how
well learning has taken place.
• They should allow for sustained language practice.
Types of Drills
A drill is a drill is a drill, right? Not so! They come in various forms—repetition
drills, substitution drills, and transformation drills are among the main types. Each
type of drill can be meaningful or mechanical, depending upon how you develop
it. We will explain several types of drills on the following pages.
Repetition Drills
Repetition drills are useful for familiarizing students quickly with a specific structure or formulaic expression (Doff 1990, 71). The teacher’s language is repeated
with no change. Be sure to teach the meaning of the utterance first. The example
that follows illustrates this type of drill:
Teacher: It’s cold outside.
Students: It’s cold outside.
Teacher: It’s warm outside.
Students: It’s warm outside.
Because repetition drills are extremely mechanical, they should not be used for prolonged practice. Preferably they should lead quickly into another kind of drill or
oral practice activity that allows students to manipulate the form being practiced in
meaningful and relevant ways.
Substitution Drills
Substitution drills are slightly more interactive than repetition drills because they
usually give students practice in changing a word or structure in response to a
prompt or cue from the teacher or another student. The teacher’s prompt can be a
whole sentence, a word, a phrase, or a picture. Here is a mechanical substitution
drill using a single-word (in italics) prompt:
Presenting Drills
When presenting drills, provide students with a written example on a handout or
on the board or as a transparency. Model the drill with another student, or have
two students model the drill for the rest of the class. If you are conducting the drill,
observe student responses carefully to assess learning. If students are working in
pairs or groups, circulate and observe, assisting where necessary. Be sure to end the
drill before it becomes tedious. You can do a follow-up, especially to meaningful
drills, by having each student write up the drill as a dialogue.
Drills are often presented with the teacher at the front of the class and the students responding. You can add variety by tossing a ball or beanbag to the student
who is to respond. This keeps everyone alert because they cannot anticipate who
will be called on next. In a question-answer drill format, the student who receives
the ball responds to you and then asks a question of the next student who is to
receive the ball.
Chain drills also add variety. Rather than having all the students repeat the
same thing, have students sit in a circle or semicircle. Then have one student ask the
next student a question to which he or she responds as in this example of a class of
five students. If you have a large class, you can have several circles of up to ten students doing this activity while you circulate. Note that you start by modeling what
is expected.
Teacher: My name is Mary, and I like eating. What about you?
Student 1: My name is Earnest, and I like reading. What about you?
Student 2: My name is Anatoli, and I like camping. What about you?
Student 3: My name is Marina, and I like singing. What about you?
Student 4: My name is Martin, and I like swimming. What about you?
Student 5: My name is Svetlana, and I like dating! What about you?
For more advanced students, this model can be used:
Teacher: My name is Ruth, and I’ve always wanted to be a gypsy. What
have you always wanted to do?
Student 1: My name is XingXing, and I’ve always wanted to be a rock star.
What have you always wanted to do?
Student 2: My name is Chinghua, and I’ve wanted to be a snowboard champion. What have you always wanted to do?
6 Tools and Tips for Using ELT Materials—Web Only
And, for extra challenge, try this:
Teacher: My name is Ruth, and I’ve always wanted to be a gypsy. How
about you?
Student 1: Your name is Ruth, and you’ve always wanted to be a gypsy. My
name is XingXing, and I’ve always wanted to be a rock star.
Student 2: Your name is Ruth, and you’ve always wanted to be a gypsy. Her
name is XingXing, and she’s always wanted to be a rock star. My
name is Chinghua, and I’ve always wanted to be a snowboard
champion.
Student 3: Your name is Ruth, and you’ve always wanted to be a gypsy. Her
name is XingXing, and she’s always wanted to be a rock star. Her
name is Chinghua, and she’s always wanted to be a snowboard
champion. My name is Xiaohui, and I’ve always wanted to be a
concert pianist.
This drill ends with you repeating the aspirations of the entire class. Obviously, you
shouldn’t try this with groups larger than about fifteen students. The next section
deals with dialogues.
Dialogues as Language Teaching Material
Dialogues, Definition, Uses, and Adaptations
Dialogues are popular activities in ESL textbooks for a number of linguistic as well
as cultural reasons. You can use or adapt dialogues to:
• demonstrate grammar in context
• facilitate conversation—This may parallel grammar instruction, but also
gives specific language practice, for example, use of gambits and formulaic
expression or language. Gambits and formulaic expression or language are
common phrases or multiword units found useful in developing fluency in
both adults and children (Wood 2002).
• provide recreation such as a skit—These dialogues are bridging activities that
provide spontaneous use of learner knowledge.
Dialogues usually present spoken language within a context and are thus typically longer than drills. However, those used for oral practice should be short so
students remember them.
Dialogues are primarily used to provide speaking practice but can also develop
listening. You can use dialogues to introduce and practice a function, structure, or
vocabulary, and to illustrate degrees of politeness, levels of formality, and values
and attitudes of the target culture. You can also work with students to analyze written dialogues for any of these features. Dialogues are useful for listening to and
practicing pronunciation, intonation, and other phonological features. Like drills,
they are usually materials for guided, rather than free, language practice.
You can combine dialogues with writing by having students make comics with
pictures and bubble dialogue boxes to fill in. You may develop longer dialogues to
provide a stimulus to problem solving and discussion about a topic. For example,
Drills, Dialogues, and Role Plays 7
one dialogue in Jill Bell and Marjatta Holt (1988) focuses on discrimination and
landlord and tenant rights. Longer dialogues are also useful for listening practice.
Standard Printed Dialogues
Printed dialogues usually consist of several short exchanges between two people, as
in this shopping dialogue:
A: Hello. May I help you?
B: No thanks. I’m just looking.
A: Well, let me know if you need anything.
B: Okay, thank you.
These kinds of dialogues are especially useful for introducing common expressions
to beginners. It helps them to develop a bank of authentic expressions and vocabulary that they can use immediately. Students who have studied a lot of English
grammar in an EFL situation can also benefit from dialogues that introduce them
to genuine spoken language.
Developing and Adapting Standard Dialogues
You will find standard printed dialogues in many textbooks. You may find, however, that a textbook dialogue is not appropriate for some reason. For example, the
expressions used are British and not what is heard in your teaching context, the language used does not sound natural or authentic, or the dialogue contains too many
complex structures or difficult words. You may also decide to teach language for a
situation that is not found in your textbook or personalize the dialogue to your students’ needs and interests. These are instances where you will want to adapt or write
your own dialogues. Here are some points to keep in mind when writing or adapting dialogues for students to practice (based on Slager 1976 cited in Omaggio 1984
and Graham 1992).
